Docs/update concepts (#228)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: docs/concepts/actors.mdx

title: "Actors"
date: 2020-05-01T00:00:00+00:00
icon: "ti-anchor" # themify icon pack : https://themify.me/themify-icons
description: "Small building blocks of business logic"
sidebar_position: 3
type: "docs"
---

## Overview

> The [actor model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) is a model of concurrent computation that's been around since **1973** and is as meaningful and applicable today than it was 50 years ago. In this model, the **actor** is the primitive building block of concurrent computation. Actors are "black-box" computational entities that can only communicate with other actors by passing messages and creating new actors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [actor model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) is a model of concurrent computation that informs the way to build applications on wasmCloud. In this model, the **actor** is the primitive building block of concurrent computation. Actors are "black-box" computational entities that can only communicate with other actors by passing messages.
```

Link to wiki 👍 so now we don't need to explain how applicable we are for using a 50 year old model

Since wasmCloud can't create other actors, I'm want to remove the last part since it's the reader's first intro to the concept and we don't want to [train them wrong](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d696t3yALAY).

* Make local decisions
* Choose how to react to the next message

Implicit in this list is the rule that actors can't modify or directly read the state of other actors. The only way data is exchanged between entities in this system is through messages. There are a _ton_ of amazing resources on this concept, and if you're interested we highly recommend that you track down some of the references in the [Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model).

**Note:** While it's possible to implement the actor model using these strict, academic constraints, wasmCloud must temper them with some practical concerns that arise from the need to manage **secure** and **resilient** distributed workloads.

### Stateless By Design

> wasmCloud actors are **stateless**, allowing hundreds or thousands of copies of an actor to be horizontally scaled across a cluster to meet compute demands. When an actor needs state, it obtains it easily through the use of a capability provider. By using capability providers, wasmCloud can ensure that no matter which instance of an actor is invoked, or where it's running in the cluster, it can still dynamically respond to the state of the larger application.

Reviewer 2: Link to capability providers doc here?

Also some spacing between the first and second sentence might be good?

Providers like the [concordance](https://github.com/cosmonic/concordance) event sourcing provider create a developer experience that feels very much like internally stateful actors, while still optimized for distributed systems.

### Centralized Supervision

Actor supervision is a hallmark of the actor model. If you're used to systems like [Akka](https://akka.io/), where an application is one big supervision tree, and the only way to start an actor is from inside another actor, then wasmCloud's supervision model may seem awkward to you.

wasmCloud actors do not supervise other actors. In a zero trust environment, allowing actors to spawn others is a security risk. wasmCloud hosts maintain the horizontal scale of actors with an entirely flat hierarchy.

### Actor Components

> An **_actor_ component** is the smallest unit of deployable, portable compute within the wasmCloud ecosystem. Actor components are small WebAssembly components that can handle messages delivered to them by the host runtime and can invoke functions on [capability providers](./capabilities.mdx), provided they have been granted the appropriate privileges.

Reviewer 2: First sentence probably deserves to stand on it's own.

Also it might be worth linking the phrase "WebAssembly components", since that means a very specific thing despite the generality of "component" as word

While it's nice not worrying about the underlying concurrency model, it's important to understand that our single-threaded code has the potential to create bottlenecks. Therefore, when developing _message handlers_ for actor components, we need to embrace the design of performing small amounts of work in a "get in and get out fast" approach: divide the work to be done into the smallest bits possible, and perform each bit as fast as we can. This approach maximizes the benefits of _external concurrency_ while still keeping the code we write blissfully synchronous.

Again, these kinds of patterns occur in all actor systems, not just wasmCloud.

### Reactive

> Actor components are [reactive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactive_programming). An actor cannot initiate any action on its own, it can only _react_ to outside stimuli in the form of messages delivered by the host. Developers declare which messages their actor components handle as input and return messages as output. The following example implements a handler that receives a bank account query and responds with the bank account value:

Reviewer 2: Spacing out the third sentence ("Developers ...") might make sense here

While the preceding actor code could communicate with capability providers (e.g. a _key-value store_ to retrieve the account balance), it could only do so in response to a message being delivered from the host.

### Communication by Abstraction

> wasmCloud actor components are _loosely coupled_ with the capability providers they use for non-functional requirements. An actor doesn't communicate with **Redis** or **Cassandra** or **Consul**, instead it communicates with a generalized abstraction over _key-value stores_. Under the hood, each of these abstractions is represented by a contract or [interface](./interface-driven-development.mdx). As long as the capability provider implements the correct interface contract, it should be considered compatible with your actor. An actor written against the key-value store abstraction should be able to work with _any_ key-value store, and even have that store swapped live at runtime without requiring a rebuild or redeploy.

Reviewer 2: "Under the hood" -> new paragraph?
